Top 12 Most Asked Questions About Cancer for 2022


1. What organs are most commonly affected by cancer?

Cancer may affect any part of the human body, but most commonly it affects cervical (in women), breast fat tissues (women), lungs (both men and women), kidneys (mostly in men), liver (men), and larynx (both men and women).

2. What are the symptoms of lung cancer?

If you suffer from lung cancer, you may have certain symptoms to watch out for, including:

Shortness of breath.
Bleeding during cough.
Fatigue.
Problems with breathing.
Chest pain.
Irregular heartbeat.

3. Who is affected by lung cancer?

Lung cancer is mostly seen in people who make use of tobacco in some form. However, usually smokers fall prey to this form of cancer and it affects about 29 percent of adults in the United States. The prevalence of the condition increases with age, and about 63 percent of people over the age of 60 are affected. In African-Americans, the condition is more common, starts at a younger age, and is more severe than in other populations.

4. What are the types of cancer?

Primary: Abnormal activity of the organ concerned.

Secondary: Another medical condition that is seen in persons suffering from cancer is intense pain in organs affected by cancer. Usually occurring in the kidneys, liver, cervical and mamary glands, the disease causes lumps to form on or inside the organ. The lumps are actually abnormal tissue growth and they are the carcinogenic cells in the organ.

5. How is cancer treated?

Most cancers are nowadays treated with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy. In chemotherapy, patients are administered medication that may either be taken orally or injected in the blood vessels. This type of treatment usually disturb the physical constitution of the patient, and in some cases, causes mental instability too. Radiotherapy also causes these issues but in extreme cases it is the only form of treatment and hence the side effects are usually tolerated by the patient.

